Windows 10 operating system is, at the time of writing this
lesson, the latest client operating system by Microsoft. This
system encapsulated all advantageous solutions of the previous
OSs (Windows 7 and 8) and besides, it is adapted to work
with the use of modern cloud technologies.
Windows 10 is presented in seven different versions:
¦¦ Windows 10 Home
¦¦ Windows 10 Professional
¦¦ Windows 10 Enterprise
¦¦ Windows 10 Education
¦¦ Windows 10 Mobility
¦¦ Windows 10 Mobility Enterprise
¦¦ Windows 10 Anniversary Edition.
Microsoft also offers a simplified version of the OS, which
was developed for the Internet of things — Windows 10 IoT
Core. It is positioned as an option for an embedded solution.
In Windows 10, the shortcomings revealed during the use
of Windows 8 were fixed. It loads faster, turns off faster than
Windows 8. It also adds the ability to use the Start button and
the main menu, as it was implemented in Windows 7. File
operations are also faster than in previous versions of the OS.
Innovations that appeared in Windows 10
Cortana is a personal assistant. When asking her a question,
you will get possible answers to it.
Secure Boot is the ability to use hardware virtualization
to prevent the launch of malicious programs on your system
during its launch.
Virtual Smart Cards is a new offer from Windows 10 to
use two-stage authentication without the need for additional
hardware.
Miracast. Windows 10 allows you to project a laptop or
other mobile device’s screen to a projector or TV. Miracast allows
you to connect to an external device using the adapter
of your mobile wireless display (WiDi).
Hyper-V. Windows 10 (except Home version) contains
Hyper-V built into Windows components.
Enterprise Data Protection. This technology allows you
to protect corporate data in those organizations that practice
the BYOD approach (bring your personal device). EDP helps
protect corporate data from the possibility of damaging them
by personal programs on the employee’s personal device.
Device Guard is a technology that allows only authorized
applications to run on devices running Windows 10. It also
prevents malicious software from running.
Microsoft Passport. Windows 10 allows administrators
to replace passwords with other types of authentication in
the operating system. Microsoft Passport allows multifactor
authentication using a combination of registered device, biometric
authentication or personal identification number (PIN).
Microsoft has added the ability to use your Microsoft account
using your corporate account. Thus, with Windows 10
Microsoft Passport, you can be registered in your domain, as
well as in the cloud and on Microsoft Web sites. After the initial
two-step verification, when you register with Microsoft
Passport, the Microsoft Passport service is configured on
the user’s device and the user determines the gesture that can
be Windows Hello (biometric check) or PIN. The user makes
a gesture to verify their identity, after which Windows uses
Microsoft Passport to authenticate the user and provide access
to protected resources and services. Since no password
is required, the use of hacking software to crack the password
in the account becomes impossible.
The Start menu — Windows 10 returned the Start menu
that users were familiar with on Windows 7. The Start menu of
Windows 10 combines the best of Windows 7 and Windows 8.
Thus, the Start menu provides you with a menu, which we
knew in Windows 7, as well as «Live» tiles, which users liked
in Windows 8.
Microsoft Edge and Internet Explorer 11. In Windows 10,
there is a new way to search the Internet with Microsoft Edge.
But Windows 10 also still comes with Internet Explorer 11 in
case you need to start ActiveX controls or run backward-compatible
web services or sites.
Microsoft Edge allows users to use many new Microsoft
features, including Web Note (the ability to comment, highlight
and display information directly on web pages), Read
(allows you to print and save as PDF for easy reading), and
Cortana (personal assistant).
Domain registration and group policy. Depending on
the version of Windows 10 that is being used, administrators
can connect the computer to the domain as a Windows 10
client, either to the corporate version of Active Directory, or
to the cloud version of Azure Active Directory.
The Windows Store for Business. The Microsoft Store includes
many applications that allow users to get the best functionality
and performance from their Windows 10 devices.
One of the benefits of corporations is that they can create
their own applications and download them to the Microsoft
Store for download by users.
Mobile Device Management. Mobile Device Management
(MDM) allows administrators to set Windows 10 policies that
can integrate many enterprise scripts, including the ability to
control user access to the Windows store and the ability to
use corporate VPN.
MDM also allows administrators to manage multiple users
who have accounts configured in Microsoft Azure Active
Directory (Azure AD). Windows 10 MDM support is based
on the 1.2.1 OpenMan Alliance (OMA) Device Management
(DM) protocol specification.
Obsolete Windows features
With the release of its latest operating system, Microsoft
decided that some of the features are no longer needed. Here
are some of the functions that are obsolete:
¦¦ Gadgets for Windows 7 are removed from components
in Windows 10.
¦¦ The Solitaire, Minesweeper and Hearts games that were
installed in Windows 7 will be removed. Microsoft released
a version of Solitaire and Minesweeper called Microsoft
Solitaire Collection and Microsoft Minesweeper.
¦¦ The functionality of Mobile Device Management will not
be available in Windows 10 Home Edition.
¦¦ Users with floppy drives will need to download the latest
driver from Windows Update or from the manufacturer’s
website.
¦¦ Users, who have Windows Live Essentials installed on their
systems, will lose the OneDrive application which will be
replaced with the OneDrive version for incoming messages.
¦¦ OneDrive will no longer support placeholders in Windows
10. Windows 10 users can choose which folders they
want to synchronize using OneDrive settings.
¦¦ If you upgrade Windows 10 from previous versions of
Windows operating systems that support Media Center,
Windows Media Center will be removed.
Windows 10 Architecture
Windows 10 uses a limited number of files used when booting
the OS, resulting in increased performance. The system
is represented by 32-bit and 64-bit versions. It makes sense
to choose a 64-bit version, at least for reasons of the available
amount of RAM. For a 32-bit system, this is 3.5 Giga Bytes,
and for a 64-bit system it is 16 Exo Bytes.