Upgrade to Windows 10
After we looked at the clean installation steps, let’s move
on to the upgrade to Windows 10 from Windows 8.1. Like
with the clean installation, you can start the installation from
the installation DVD, from USB or through the network. As
the source of the installation files, just like with the clean installation,
we select DVD.
Updating the Windows 7 or Windows 8.1 system to
Windows 10 will save you a lot of time and save you a lot of
problems. As we update the system, all user data and applications
will remain installed and will most likely work the same
way. Sometimes, when we update the system, there may be
problems with the applications. Most often this is caused by
an incorrect driver or the need to update the software to a version
adapted to work with Windows 10.
The three main steps in the Windows 10 upgrade process
are similar to those used during a clean installation:
■■ Collecting information
■■ Installing Windows
■■ Configuring Windows
Install Windows 8.1 Professional as another virtual machine.
The process of creating a new virtual machine is similar
to the one previously discussed, so we will not dwell on it.
The image of the DVD disk is downloaded by placing an order
on it and receiving a serial number
Transfer and Migration of User Data
Of all the migration utilities and user data migration to
Windows 10, only the USMT utility included in Windows
ADK (which will be reviewed a little later) remains. But to
fill this gap, Microsoft, together with LapLink, provides you
with PCmover Express, which allows you to transfer selected
files, folders, and other items from your old Windows computer
to a new computer running Windows 10. You can find
and use this utility following the link http://pcmoverfree.
azurewebsites.net/.
Troubleshoot at Installation
The process of installing Windows 10 is quite simple.
The chances of installation errors are greatly minimized
through the use of wizards and a step-by-step process.
However, the occurrence of errors is possible and you have
to be prepared.
Identifying Common Installation Problems
During the installation, you may encounter some of the following
errors:
■■ Media errors. Media errors are caused by defective or
damaged DVDs. To check the disk, place it on another
computer and see if it can read it. Also, check your drive
for scratches or dirt, in this case, you just need to clean it.
■■ Insufficient disk space. Windows 10 requires at least 16GB
for 32-bit OS and 20GB for correct operation of 64-bit OS.
If the installer determines that this space is not enough, it
will not allow you to continue.
■■ Insufficient RAM. Make sure that your computer has
the minimum amount of memory required for Windows 10
(1GB for 32-bit or 2GB for 64-bit version). Insufficient
memory may result in installation failure or the appearance
of blue screen of death after installation.
■■ Insufficient processing power. Make sure that your computer
has the minimum computing power required by
Windows 10 (a processor with a clock speed of 1GHz or
higher). Insufficient processing power can lead to installation
failure or the appearance of blue screen of death
after installation.
■■ Devices that are not included in the HCL. If your hardware
is not listed in the HCL, Windows 10 may not recognize
this component, or the device may not function correctly.
■■ Devices without driver support. Windows 10 does not
recognize hardware without driver support.
■■ A device that is not configured properly. If your hardware
is Plug and Play (PnP) compatible, Windows 10 should
automatically configure it. If your hardware is not Plug and
Play compatible, you need to manually configure the equipment
according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
■■ Invalid product key. Without a valid product key, installation
will not be possible. Make sure you typed the key correctly.
■■ Inability to access network resources. If you install Windows
10 with the usual settings, the computer will receive
network configuration information from the DHCP server.
If the DHCP server is not present, the client will still
generate an automatically configured IP address, but will
not be able to access network resources via TCP/IP if other
network clients use DHCP addresses.
■■ Installing unsupported hard disks. If your computer
has a hard drive that does not have a driver included in
the Windows 10 installation media driver base, you will
receive an error message indicating that the hard disk cannot
be found. You need to make sure that the hard drive is
properly connected and functioning. You will need to get
the Windows 10 disk driver from the manufacturer, and then
specify the location of the driver by selecting the Download
option at the drive selection and partition stage.
Troubleshooting Using Log Files
When you install Windows 10, setup creates several log
files. You can view these logs to check for any problems during
the installation process. Two log files are particularly useful
for troubleshooting:
■■ The action log includes all the actions that were performed
during the installation process, and a description of each
action. These actions are listed in chronological order.
The action log is stored as \ Windows \ setupact.log.
■■ The error log contains errors that occurred during the installation.
For each error, there is a description and an indication
of the error severity. This error log is saved as \
Windows \ setuperr.log.