2. Managing Printers
Printers have been a problem for hardware and software
developers around the world and will continue to be so. Each
new update/release/version of the operating system has a new
software package that facilitates installation and maintenance,
but printer technologies continue to be updated and improved,
and hardware manufacturers continue to make changes.
The driver base for all existing printers will be huge, since
even for the same printer there are many options. The printers
themselves, in turn, have a large set of various options that
can be made available, and all this should be controlled by
the operating system through the drivers.
Terminology Features: Printer and Print Device
In the IT world, we need to distinguish between the functionality
of hardware and software (both driver software and
management software).
A physical device with paper in it is called a print device,
not a printer. Printer is a software application on the local
machine that controls the print device. The printer driver is
a software layer between the operating system and the locally
installed software (printer).
In most organizations, not all printers are connected to
each computer. Usually one device is used by several users.
This is economically viable, but tends to cause problems. Every
one – ordinary users and IT professionals – should occasion
ally print something, and so we send our documents or web
pages to the printer when we want to print them.
The print device can be connected to someone's machine
and shared by others, or it can be a stand-alone device. You
can have a print server on your network that has one or more
print devices, and all users will send their documents to this
server. Printer and the relevant drivers will be installed on each
user computer so that Windows 10 can send the document
to the print device through the printer using the appropriate
instructions.
Of course, the print device cannot physically print the
document at the speed at which the printer can send data to
it. Here comes the software component called the spooler.
There must be software components that can buffer the print
job until the print device can complete it. In fact, there may
be more than one user sending documents to print to the
same print device at the same time, and the spooler will also
process them.
Printer Installation
You can install the printer on your computer in two different
ways:
■■ First, when the print device is physically connected to
a computer,
■■ The second is a network installation.
In any case, there must be software drivers, and they can
be on CD/DVD, on a network resource downloaded in advance
from the manufacturer's website, or even be present in the files
of the Windows distribution. After installation, the printers
in Windows 10 will be located in the Devices and Printers
window and allow Device Stage configurations to use the full
range of functions from this single location.
To add a printer to your computer locally, you usually
run the installer on a CD/DVD (following the manufacturer's
instructions). The installation program from the manufacturer
in the form of a wizard will ask relevant questions. You
can configure the printer through Windows 10, as well as by
adding the Devices and Printers function.
To add a printer using the Windows 10 features, right-click
Start, click Control Panel, click Browse Devices and Printers,
and then click Add a Printer in the window that opens. When
USB printers are connected, they will be automatically detected
and their drivers will be installed (or at least automatically
searched) (see Figure 15).
Selecting the Add Printer menu item launches the Add
Wizard, and displays a screen where you can select which
printer you want to install. If the desired printer is not listed,
you can select the Required printer is not listed link. If the
printer was not specified, the following screen allows you to
choose whether to install the printer using the printer's network
name, TCP/IP address, wireless discovery, or by adding
a local or network printer (see Figure 16).After the printer setup wizard finishes or the installer
installs your printer from the manufacturer, you can open
the Devices and printers window and look at the device
that appeared. Through the context menu, you get access to
the Properties dialog box, as well as to some of the standard
print functions. Since manufacturers continue to constantly
add new functionality to Windows 10, you will have access
to a full set of software components from the Devices and
Printers window, at least for manufacturers who will support
the Device Stage specification.
To configure the printer to connect to a remote print device,
you must start the Add Printer Wizard and go through
the process of installing the printer, but point to a shared or
standalone network printer using one of the suggested options.
Not all computers in any company network will have
physically connected print devices. So, it is possible to allow
sharing of network devices and installation of printers (software)
on client machines.
Configuring Printers
After you have installed printer for the print device that
is physically connected to a local computer or connected over
a network, you can view the printer's configuration settings
and, if necessary, change them in the Properties dialog box
(see Figure 17).
The Properties dialog box for printers conforms to the
standard set by Microsoft, but the content really depends on
the manufacturer. Some manufacturers will provide more
information than others. Most printers will provide a basic
set of tabs (see Figure 18).
General tab
The printer name, location, and comments are displayed
here. Usually a model is shown, as well as features of a particular
print device and available paper. The printer settings
page is accessible through the Settings button.
Sharing tab
On the Sharing tab, you can share the printer if it was
not provided during its installation, or stop sharing if it was
previously provided. You can also add drivers for other operating
systems so that a locally installed and shared printer
can provide drivers for other computers trying to connect
and use them.
Ports tab
Available ports and connected print devices can be viewed
on the Ports tab. You can add a port, delete a port, and configure
ports through this tab. Typically, operating systems
simply send data to the print device, but some print devices
must interact with the operating system. This is called bi-directional
support (sending codes back from the print device
to the printer for management).
There is also a pool of printers. Pooling allows the system
engineer to configure multiple print devices (using identical
drivers) to be displayed as a single printer for users. Print
tasks will be printed on one of the devices in the pool (the
first print device prints the job). If the print device fails, others
will continue to work.
It is important that all printers entering the pool are next
to each other. If one device fails, the print job will be printed
on the next available device, and they will be scattered
throughout the company, then users will have to search for
their printed documents for a long time .
The Advanced tab (see Figure 19) provides various configuration
options for controlling functions of the printer
and the print device. One of the available settings is the time
within which the printer is available. You can set certain hours
or allow the printer to always be available.
Configuring the installed print driver is also an option,
since a new driver is added (by running the Add Printer
Driver Wizard).