Windows 10 Installation
The first step of installing Windows 10 is to select the type of
media from which the installation will be performed. Windows 10
offers several ways to perform the installation.
You can install Windows 10 either from a bootable DVD,
or over a network, using files that have been previously copied
to a shared resource or a USB device. You can also install
Windows 10 using a virtual hard disk (vhd). You can also run
the setup.exe file from the Windows 10 operating system to
update the operating system. To start installation, just restart
the computer and boot from the DVD-ROM. The installation
process will start automatically.
If you decide to install Windows 10 over a network, you
need to preconfigure the deployment server. A deployment
server is a server with specially prepared Windows 10 installation
files copied to a shared folder.
Running a Clean Installation of Windows 10
Whenever you install Windows 10, there are three steps.
1. Collection of information. At the data collection stage,
Windows 10 collects the information necessary to complete
the installation. This is where Windows 10 is requesting
your local time, location, keyboard layout, license
agreement, installation type, and partition information for
the installation disc.
2. Windows installation. During this installation stage,
the Windows 10 files are copied to the hard drive. This
stage takes the maximum time.
3. Configuring Windows. At this point, you configure the user
name, computer name, and password; enter the product key;
configure security settings. Once this stage is completed,
the installation will be considered complete.
Let’s consider the process of clean installation from a DVD
drive step by step.
Last time (the material of the first lesson) we created and
configured a virtual machine to run on it Windows 10 Education
as a guest OS. Let’s open properties of the virtual machine
and make sure that the image of the installation DVD
is installed in the virtual DVD drive
After this, close the settings window and press Start (fig. 4).
The virtual machine starts and, according to the settings,
the first device being polled is the DVD drive in which the installation
disk is located. As a result, after a few seconds we
see the first window of the installation wizard, in which we
are offered to choose the installation language, time format,
and input method
The next step is to tick the I accept the license terms check box,
otherwise the installation will not be possible later (fig. 7). L
Select the Custom installation type. We have nothing to
update. In a virtual machine, we have an empty hard disk,
which does not yet contain any information. You can, if you
want, use the link at the bottom of the Help me decide window
Also at this stage, you can create other partitions, but given
the limited functionality, it is better to perform these operations
after installing the OS. In some cases, if RAID controllers
are used, the drivers must be installed in order for
the system to determine the disks connected to them. To do
this, there is the Load button. If a message appears that there
are no drivers for the optical drive — the reason is in the disk
or disk image!
Press the Next button and wait a few minutes until the necessary
files are copied to the hard disk 
The penultimate stage of configuration is creating an account.
Here are two options: either to use the account of one
of the Microsoft services or create a local account. Let’s choose
the second option. To do this, we will point the link in the lower
left corner — Join a domain.
Microsoft offers two basic types of network: workgroup-based
or domain-based. Workgroups (also called peer-to-peer networks)
are where you simply connect your computers together.
An excellent example of a peer-to-peer network is the home
network. Most home users connect their computers together
without using the primary server.
Corporations usually do it differently. Domains are networks
that are controlled by servers called domain controllers.
Domain controllers are Windows servers with a copy of
the Active Directory (AD) database. Recently, Microsoft expanded
the concept of domain networks, allowing companies
to create a cloud version of the Active Directory domain
(Azure AD). This means that companies no longer need to
maintain and manage their own domain controllers.
Since we do not have a cloud version of Azure AD, we chose
the option Join a domain so that we can complete the installation
of Windows 10
The installation is complete. Windows 10 greets you and
immediately suggests configuring the visibility of your computer
on the network, as well as download and install the latest
updates (fig. 21).
You can refuse by clicking the Not now link in the lower
left corner, but it is recommended that you perform this
procedure, because this is, on the one hand, the correction
of errors detected since the publication of this DVD image
(in the screenshot, where we accept the license agreement,
there is is the date of the last update — December 2016 L),
on the other hand, security improvement.