Working with Images
When it comes to installing Windows 10 in a corporate
environment, it means installing the OS on hundreds of computers
on the network. Installing the OS on each computer
separately is a slow and very time-consuming process.
Image is a kind of backup copy of the operating system
that you can use later for several installations of this system.
The creation of an image is the process of saving the OS
state with the subsequent possibility of using the created image
to install the OS on new computers, which ultimately makes it
possible to automate the installation process. Windows 10 is
installed on the reference or source computer, the necessary
OS settings are made and applications are installed, which
must then be installed on the target computers. Then an image
of this OS is created, which can be transferred to other computers.
As a result, when installing the operating system, we
get the settings and applications that were defined on the reference
computer.
Overview of the system preparation tools
and disk image creation
The Sysprep (Sysprep.exe) preparation tool is used to
prepare the computer for creating the disk image, and then
the disk image can be created using the Image Capture Wizard
(image management tool included with Windows 10) or using
the Deployment Image Servicing and Management utility
(DISM ).
Sysprep is a free utility that is included in all modern
Windows operating systems. By default, the Sysprep utility can
be found in the \Windows\system32\sysprep directory
is quite often the method used for automatic deployment
when you have a large number of computers with similar configuration
requirements or computers that you often need to
reconfigure (reinstall the OS). For example, some training
company reinstalls the same software every few weeks for new
classes. Having ready-made system images is a quick and easy
way to simplify the deployment process.
Most organizations use images to create new machines,
but they also use them to reinstall the OS on end-user computers,
which for some reason have stopped working.
Some organizations use third-party software to capture images
(for example, Ghost or others) instead of using Sysprep.
exe and the Image Capture Wizard.
To perform an automatic installation, the system preparation
tool prepares the reference computer, removing any unique
computer data, such as the security identifier (SID) that is used
to uniquely identify each computer on the network; any event
logs, and any other unique system information. The system
preparation tool also detects all Plug and Play devices that are
installed and can be dynamically configured for any computer
on which different hardware is installed.
When the client computer starts the installation using a disk
image, you can configure what is displayed on the Windows
Welcome screen and the options displayed during the configuration
process. You can also fully automate when and
how the Windows Welcome screen will be displayed during
the installation process using the / oobe outof-the-box option
by means of the system preparation tool and the answer file
named Oobe.xml
Sysprep is a utility that is only used to configure a new
OS. It makes no sense to use Sysprep to create an image that
will be used to update the current OS. There are several keys
that you can use together with the Sysprep command to configure
the utility for specific tasks. The table shows the basic
Sysprep switches.
The SID Problem with the Deployment Software
The first time the procedure for deploying the OS was to
create an image for each computer that could only be used
later for deploying the OS on the same computer.
Then, several third-party companies developed software
that allowed the image of the Microsoft operating system to
be deployed on other machines. One of the advantages of this
is that all the software installed in the system can also be part
of this image. It was a great way to copy all the software from
one computer to another.
But ther was one serious problem — the security identifier
(SID). All computers receive a unique SID that represents
them on the domain network. The problem is that when copying
an image to another computer, the SID was also copied.
To solve this problem, Microsoft released Sysprep. It allows
you to delete the SID number so that when you later deploy
the system from this image, it is newly generated and has
a different value. Many software products of other companies
for working with images now also delete the SID number, but
Sysprep is one of the first utilities that helped solve this problem.
When you decide to use Sysprep to configure your images,
you must follow several rules for Sysprep to function correctly:
You can use Sysprep to restart the Windows activation timer.
The Windows activation timer runs as soon as Windows
starts the first time. You can only restart the Windows activation
timer three times using Sysprep.
The computer, on which you run Sysprep, must be a member
of the workgroup. It cannot be part of a domain. If the computer
is a member of a domain, when you start Sysprep, the computer
is automatically deleted from the domain.
When installing from an image, the system prompts you
to enter the product key. During the installation, you can use
an answer file, which in turn, will have all the information you
need to install, and you do not need to enter any information.
To capture and deploy an image created with Sysprep, you
need a third-party utility or image capture wizard.
If you use Sysprep to capture an NTFS partition, any files or
folders that are encrypted will become corrupted and unreadable.
One of the advantages of using Sysprep in Windows 10 is
that you can use Sysprep to prepare a new computer for duplication.
You can use Sysprep to create an image of Windows 10.
To do this, you must perform the following steps:
1. Install Windows 10 .
2. Install all components in the OS.
3. Run Sysprep /generalize to prepare the system for capture.
4. The system will reboot. After the computer restarts, use
the image capture tool.
Benefits of the System Preparation Tool
The following are the benefits of using the system preparation
tool as a method to automate the installation of Windows 10:
For a large number of computers with the same hardware,
this greatly reduces deployment time by placing the operating
system, applications and desktop settings from the reference
computer into an image that can then be deployed to multiple
computers.
The use of disk images facilitates the standardization of
desktops, administrative policies, and restrictions throughout
the organization.
Reference images can be copied over the network or through
DVD-ROMs, distributing them to client computers.
Disadvantages of the System Preparation Tool
There are some disadvantages of using the system preparation
tool as a method of automating the installation of
Windows 10:
■■ You must use the Image Capture Wizard, a third-party
software, or hardware disk duplication devices.
■■ You must use the version of the system preparation tool
that comes with Windows 10. An older version of Sysprep
cannot be used to prepare for creating a Windows 10 image.
■■ The system preparation tool does not detect any hardware
that is not Plug and Play compatible.
Overview of Windows Assessment
and Deployment Kit
Another way to install Windows 10 is to use the Windows
Assessment and Deployment Kit (ADK). Windows ADK is
a set of utilities and documentation that allow an administrator
to configure and deploy Windows operating systems.
The administrator can use Windows ADK to perform the following
actions:
■■ Windows Image and Configuration Designer (ICD)
■■ Windows Assessment kit
■■ Windows Performance kit.
Windows ADK can be installed and configured on the following
operating systems:
■■ Windows 10
■■ Windows 7/8 with the upgrade package 1
■■ Windows Server 2012 R2
■■ Windows Server 2012
■■ Windows Server 2008
■■ Windows Server 2008 R2
■■ Windows Server 2003 with the upgrade package 2.
Windows ADK is a good solution for organizations that
need to configure the Windows deployment environment.
Windows ADK allows the administrator to have the flexibility
necessary for a mass deployment of Windows operating
systems. Because the needs of each organization are different,
Windows ADK allows you to use all or only some of the available
deployment tools. It allows you to manage deployment
with some additional tools.
Windows Imaging and Configuration Designer (ICD).
The tools included in this part of the Windows ADK will allow
the administrator to easily deploy and configure operating
systems and Windows images.
Windows Application Compatibility Toolkit. When installing
new Windows operating systems, applications running
on a previous version of Windows may not work correctly.
The application compatibility tool allows the administrator
to help solve these problems before they occur.
Windows Performance Toolkit is a utility that will find
computers on the network and then conduct a complete inventory
of them. Then, this information can be used to determine
which computers can have installed Windows 10.
Windows Imaging and Configuration Designer.
The Windows imaging and configuration designer (ICD) allows
the administrator to work with images. ICD allows the IT
department to do the following:
■■ View and configure all settings and policies for the Windows
10 image or security package
■■ Create answer files for Windows preparation
■■ Use the answer file to add third-party drivers, applications,
or other assets
■■ Create options and specify the parameters that apply to
each option
■■ Create and run a Windows image
■■ Create a security package.
Windows ICD provides the IT department with many
options for deploying and configuring Windows 10 clients.
Here are some of the functions that can be performed using
Windows ICD tools:
■■ Configuring and editing an image using the service utility
and managing the deployment process from images.
■■ Creating Windows Preinstallation Environment (Windows
PE) images
■■ Transferring user data and profiles using the User State
Migration Tool (USMT). This tool must first be downloaded
from the official Microsoft website.
■■ Windows Imaging and Configuration Designer (Windows
ICD).
Using Windows ICD to Create a Disk Image
You can download and install it from the official Microsoft
website
allation
wizard adksetup.exe. Next, you will be prompted
to immediately install ADK on this computer or download
the installation package for the possibility of subsequent installation
on multiple computers. Leave the first option and
go to the second window of the installation wizard 
We will not consider the work of absolutely all the components
that make up the ADK now, but we also cannot disable the installation
of some of them because of the constraints imposed
by the dependencies. First of all, we are interested in the ICD
component. When you select it, the right part of the window
lists the components that also require installation
We press the Install button and wait about half an hour (it
will depend greatly on the speed of the network connection)
until the installation is performed.
After running the System Preparation Tool (Sysprep) on
the source computer, you can create the image, and then you
can install the OS from the created image to the target computers.
To create an image, you can use the Image Capture
Wizard. This is a utility that you can use to create and manage
Windows image files (WIM).
To start the Image Capture Wizard to create a Windows 10
disk image, follow these steps:
1. On the Windows ICD start page, select Windows Image
Customization
2. In the Enter Project Details window, specify the name and
location for your project. If you want, you can also enter
a short description of your project
3. Press Next.
4. If you selected Windows Image Customization on the start
page, skip this step.
5. In the Select Project Workflow window, select Imaging from
the list of available workflows of the project and press Next.
6. In the Select Imaging Source Format window, select The Windows
image is based on a Windows image (WIM) file, and
then press Next
7. In the Select Image window, press Browse to run the File
Explorer. Find and specify the path to the Install.wim file
(fig. 57).
8. After you have selected the Install.wim file, all the Windows
images in the WIM file format will be displayed in
the Available Images panel. By default, the first Windows
image in the list will be offered, and information about this
image will be displayed in the Image Information panel.
9. Select the Windows image you want to use and press Next.
10. Press Finish.
There is also a console version of Windows ICD that you
can use. The command looks like this:
More detailed information about the keys and parameters of
this command can be found on Microsoft technical resources.