Update Checklist
After you decide to update, you must develop an action
plan. The following update checklist (valid for upgrading from
Windows 7 or Windows 8) will help you plan and implement
a successful upgrade strategy:
■■ Make sure that your computer meets the minimum hardware
requirements for Windows 10.
■■ Make sure that your equipment is in the HCL.
■■ Make sure that you have Windows 10 drivers for the hardware.
You can check it with the help of the equipment manufacturer.
■■ To check the current configuration and status of your
computer, launch the Get Windows 10 App from the Microsoft
Web site, which also contains documentation for
using this utility. It will generate a report of any known
problems with software or software compatibility based
on your configuration. Before upgrading to Windows 10,
you must resolve any problems that arise.
■■ Make sure your BIOS is up-to-date. Windows 10 requires
that you have the latest BIOS on your computer. If this
does not happen, it may not be able to use advanced power
management functions or device configuration functions.
In addition, your computer may stop functioning in
the process, or after an update. Be careful when updating
the BIOS, because installing the wrong BIOS version may
result in the computer being inoperable.
■■ Make an inventory of your current configuration. It should
contain information about the current network configuration,
installed applications, hardware elements and their
configuration, running servicesб and any profile and policy
settings.
■■ Backup data and configuration files. Before making any
significant changes to the configuration of your computer,
you must back up your data files and configuration, and
then verify that you can successfully restore the backup.
Most likely, if you have a valid backup, you will not have
any problems. Similarly, if you do not have a valid backup,
problems are bound to occur!
■■ Delete all unnecessary files or applications and clean up
any program groups or program items that you do not
use. Try to remove all unwanted files on your computer
before upgrading.
■■ Before upgrading, make sure that there are no existing
problems on your hard drive. Perform disk surface check,
current virus scan, and defragmentation. This step will
prepare your hard disk for updating.
■■ Perform the update. At this point, you are upgraded from
Windows 7 or Windows 8 to Windows 10.
■■ Check the configuration. After installing Windows 10, use
the previously made inventory list to compare and verify
each item that was before the update to make sure that
the update was successful.
Partition Preparation
Partition preparation is the initialization of a physical hard
disk and the creation of logical partitions. Logical disks are
the way to allocate space for the primary and logical partitions
of a disk. For example, if you have a 500GB hard drive,
you can break it into three logical drives:
■■ C: A disk that can be 200GB
■■ D: A disk that can be 150GB
■■ E: A disk that can be 150GB.
The following sections describe some of the key considerations
for partitioning a disk:
Partition size. One of the important considerations in
your partitioning scheme is determining the partition size.
You need to consider the amount of space occupied by your
operating system, the applications that will be installed, and
the amount of data stored. It is also important to consider
the amount of space required in the future.
Microsoft recommends allocating at least 20GB of disk space
for 64-bit versions and at least 16GB for 32-bit Windows 10.
This will allow the operating system files to be used for future
growth in terms of updates and installation files that are
located in the files of the operating system.
Note: In practice, the system «grows» as you update
and install programs and a limit of 20GB may not be
enough after a while. For office work, at least 50GB is
recommended. In other cases, you need to add to this
size the size of additional software and data that must
necessarily be located on the C: drive.
Windows 10 Partitions
Since the advent of Windows Vista, the system uses hidden
partitions for its work. To understand why we need this, let’s
consider what was before. Windows XP could be completely
located on one partition or, at the user’s desire, have a separate
system partition and a boot partition. The system partition
(also active) contained boot files, that is, the files needed
to boot the system. The boot partition contained the Windows
system itself. (This is the original terminology of Microsoft).
Often there have been cases that users, being inexperience or
when installing/removing an additional system, have deleted
the system boot files. To avoid these problems, starting with
Windows Vista/Windows 7, the installer created a hidden 100MB
system partition where the download files were located
each item that was before the update to make sure that
the update was successful.
Partition Preparation
Partition preparation is the initialization of a physical hard
disk and the creation of logical partitions. Logical disks are
the way to allocate space for the primary and logical partitions
of a disk. For example, if you have a 500GB hard drive,
you can break it into three logical drives:
■■ C: A disk that can be 200GB
■■ D: A disk that can be 150GB
■■ E: A disk that can be 150GB.
The following sections describe some of the key considerations
for partitioning a disk:
Partition size. One of the important considerations in
your partitioning scheme is determining the partition size.
You need to consider the amount of space occupied by your
operating system, the applications that will be installed, and
the amount of data stored. It is also important to consider
the amount of space required in the future.
Microsoft recommends allocating at least 20GB of disk space
for 64-bit versions and at least 16GB for 32-bit Windows 10.
This will allow the operating system files to be used for future
growth in terms of updates and installation files that are
located in the files of the operating system.
Note: In practice, the system «grows» as you update
and install programs and a limit of 20GB may not be
enough after a while. For office work, at least 50GB is
recommended. In other cases, you need to add to this
In Windows 8, this partition received an additional function
— a recovery partition. In this section, the recovery environment
files were added, they are located in the hidden
system folder called Recovery. In fact, this is a special mini
operating system with a set of programs for recovery in case
of failures. (It is discussed in more detail in the following lessons.)
Therefore, the section «grew» to 350MB. In Windows 10,
the first release of the recovery environment was added and
expanded, so the size of the hidden partition grew to 500MB.
In some cases, when cloning or partitioning of third-party
discs was used, the Hidden partition may be absent, and all
files that are on it should be located on the Boot disk.
The partitioning of disks and the creation of hidden
Windows 10 partitions also depends on the partitioning of
the disks (MBR or GPT) and the BIOS version. In some implementations,
the system can automatically create two separate
hidden sections — System with boot files and recovery
partition
An MSR partition can also be created that is used in UEFI
and GPT systems to support software components that previously
used hidden sectors.
Some laptop manufacturers can add an additional partition
with its own system recovery program. Typically, there
is a complete copy of Windows installed on the laptop and
after a while, it becomes not relevant.
In more detail, different versions of partition and recommendations
will be considered in the lesson Working with disks.
Disk Partition Configuration Utilities
If you decide to prepare the disk before installation, you
can use several third-party tools such as Acronis Disk Director
or Partition Manager, but I recommend using these utilities
only in extreme cases if the standard windows utilities do not
suit you. For example, you need to move partitions before
the installation or you work with Linux partitions. In most
cases, the preparation of disks can be performed by means of
Windows installation (see later in this lesson).
You can also get full control of the disk partitioning during
the installation of the Windows 10 operating system. To do
this, at the «select partition» installation, press Shift+F10 and
type diskpart in the console window that opens (For experienced
users only).
We recommend that you create only the first partition
where Windows 10 will be installed (the installer will hide
the sections itself). Then, after the installation, you can use
the Disk Management utility in Windows 10 to create any
other partitions that you need.
Languages and Localization
Language and localization settings determine the language
that the computer will use. Windows 10 supports many languages
for the interface and utilities of the operating system.
Localization settings are used to configure the format for
items such as numbers, currencies, time, and dates. For example,
English for the United States indicates a short date as
mm/dd/yyyy (month/day/year), while English for South Africa
indicates a short date as yyyy/mm/dd (year/month/day).
It is very important to choose only those localizations that
you need to use on this computer. The reason for this is that
your system will receive updates for all selected regions that
you have configured.