1. Equipment Configuration
Proper configuration of the equipment is one of the most
important tasks when configuring Windows 10. It includes
some tools that help users and administrators correctly configure
their equipment.
In Windows 10, there are built-in functions called Device
Stage. Device Stage offers an advanced graphical interface
that provides more detailed information about installed devices
and adds functionality. Device Manager in Windows
10 works the same as in Windows 7 and Windows 8/8.1. It
is designed to display information about the equipment installed
on your computer, and as an interface for adding and
configuring new hardware.
Hardware today complies with the Plug and Play standard,
so in most cases, simply connecting the equipment will allow
the device manager to automatically configure it. Devices that
are not Plug and Play compatible can be manually installed
from Device Manager.
Device Stage
One of the main features provided by a personal computer
is the use of a large set of all kinds of devices for it. Device
Manager allows us to see all the connected equipment and
make changes to the configuration, but using the functions
of the devices themselves was left for programs outside the
Windows interface. Windows 10 includes a specification for
hardware vendors (given that most hardware comes with
its own software to provide a user interface), which allows
them to give the user the ability to manage devices through
standard Windows tools. This function and specification are
known as Device Stage.
Windows Devices and Printers is an interface for displaying
and accessing equipment that supports Device Stage.
Take, for example, a digital camera. Typically, when you
connect the camera to a PC, it recognizes the device (thanks
to Plug and Play support) and usually displays it as a mass
storage device. Users, who need additional features, such as
uploading and editing photos, should use another program.
On the other hand, when you connect a device that supports
Device Stage technology, it displays a single window that
gives you easy access to common device tasks. In the case of
a camera, it is, for example, importing images, editing and
viewing images, all this using a single interface.
In Windows 10, you will be able to access all connected
wireless devices from the Devices and Printers screen, and
some devices will be displayed in the extended Windows 10
Taskbar. Here you can work with your devices, view the files
that they may contain, and manage the device settings.
Other wireless devices (for example, Bluetooth) are also
supported by Device Stage, which greatly simplifies their
management. Because peripherals are periodically disconnected
and reconnected, the Devices and Printers screen will
be updated in real time.
Using Device Manager
Device Manager is a component in Windows 10 that
you will use to find out which devices are connected to your
computer. You can use the Device Manager to ensure that all
devices function properly and to troubleshoot devices. For
each installed device, you can view specific properties up to
the resources used, such as the assigned I/O port and IRQ
(interrupt requests).
Through Device Manager, you can do the following:
■■ View a list of all hardware installed on your computer;
■■ Determine which device driver is installed for each device;
■■ Manage and update device drivers;
■■ Install new devices;
■■ Use the driver rollback to return to the previous driver
version;
■■ Troubleshoot the device.
Moreover, you can find out which Windows 10 devices
are recognized. That is, if you install or connect a new device,
and Windows 10 does not recognize it at all, this component
will not be displayed in Device Manager (which is very unlikely
given the support of Plug and Play standards by modern
vendors). However, Device Manager is an important tool that
allows you to see which devices are initialized by Windows 10.

The Device Manager has a fairly simple Start Screen, but
it has a lot of functionality. On the main screen, you see a list
of equipment that is installed and recognized. If the device is
recognized, but the driver is not installed or installed incorrectly,
it will not work, or it will work incorrectly. You will see a
warning symbol (a yellow triangle with an exclamation point)
displayed on the device with the existing problems. Suppose
you just installed a new network adapter, but the device does
not seem to work. You can open Device Manager and open
the Network Adapter option to begin the troubleshooting
process. To do this, you must right-click the wrong adapter
and select Properties to see its Properties dialog box.
There are many reasons for viewing installed and configured
devices on the computer. One of the reasons is to check the type
and condition of the hardware. For example, if someone from
your organization has provided you with documentation for
a particular computer that contains hardware specifications,
and you want to make sure that the components declared in
the specification are actually available, then you can use Device
Manager on this computer to make sure they are.
Device Properties Available in Device Manager
After opening the Device Manager and accessing the
installed devices on your computer, you can select the Properties
item in the context menu and review the contents of the tabs.
Here you can view and change the configuration settings, if
necessary. You will see that the tabs available in the Properties
dialogs will differ among devices, because the available options
may vary for different hardware components. Most devices
will have at least the General tab, the Driver tab, and the
Details tab.
The Properties dialog box for most devices will contain
more specific tabs for hardware configuration. For the network
adapter, this will be the Advanced tab for viewing and
changing more specific configuration parameters. Below is
the Advanced tab of the network adapter and the Value dropdown
list to show the possible options (see Figure 4).
Installation and Update of Device Drivers
Device drivers are control code that actually interacts
with the hardware components of the computer system.
Commands are specific to each piece of hardware, and
different instructions, memory addresses, or actions can
be used, even within the same hardware type. A network
interface card (NIC) from one manufacturer can actually
have a different set of instructions than a network adapter
from another manufacturer.
The driver accepts the standard instruction from the
operating system, interprets it, and then issues a hardware
instruction to perform the required function.
The operating system or software works best when it can
use standard commands and have the same functionality
across the entire equipment, regardless of the manufacturer.
Drivers need to be updated. For example, a set of commands
for a driver can perform some function incorrectly.
This leads to errors in the operation of the device and must
be corrected. The hardware manufacturer usually updates the
driver to fix the problem. You may also need new or improved
functionality, so the hardware manufacturer will need to
change the driver code to add functionality or provide better
performance. And this, in turn, will again lead to update.
There are various ways to download and install drivers.
Microsoft drivers can be downloaded using the Windows
Update utility. Drivers from different manufacturers can be
downloaded from the manufacturer's website. To do this, you
need to go to their site, find the product, and download the
latest drivers. Then you can install these drivers using the
built-in installation wizard or the device manager.
A typical initial installation of drivers occurs automatically
today due to the Plug and Play specification. After connecting
the hardware, Windows 10 recognizes it and launches the
driver installation program.
Let's consider connection of a digital camera to the USB
port of your computer.
Windows 10 recognizes that the device is connected and
will collect information about the USB device. Then Windows
will install the best driver that it knows about (and if it does
not know about the device, it will ask you what to do).
You can check general information about the driver, for
example, the vendor or the version. You can see this information
on the Driver tab of the Properties dialog box. You can
also view information about driver files and their location.
Note that this is not a driver store (it is a protected area).
The running driver files usually have the SYS extension and
act as part of the OS. The driver installation files have the INF
extension. Information about the driver contains information
about the vendor, the version of the file, the digital signature,
and copyright.
Sometimes, when you have problems with a hardware device,
you search the Internet for various technical information
or use search queries to try to find solutions to the problem
offered by other administrators. Someone may mention that
can even mention the exact version of the driver and offer a
fix. Having the ability to view information about drivers is
useful in this situation.
The Driver tab for a number of installed hardware in
Device Manager also provides the functionality for disabling
and uninstalling the driver. Why do you need to disable the
driver? There are several reasons, but troubleshooting is one
of the most common.
Disabling the driver effectively disables the hardware; it will
no longer function in the system. Similarly, the device driver is
deleted, but if the hardware is still installed, you can uninstall
the driver and run a check to make sure that the hardware is
still recognized, and force Windows to reinstall the driver to
try to find out whether this is the driver or device problem.
Sometimes it may be useful to uninstall and reinstall the
device driver. Every time you do this, the device configuration
parameters will be reset to their original values.
If the device driver worked earlier and stopped working
for some unknown reason (if you knew the reason, you just
fixed it), you should try to uninstall and reinstall it. You can
also use a different device driver, instead of the standard one
by Windows 10 configured for use through Plug and Play.
Note that uninstalling the device driver does not uninstall the
driver files from the device; When you uninstall the device
driver, the operating system configuration for the hardware
is deleted.
In some cases, you will need to find the driver files and
delete them manually. Remember that you can find the names
and location of the files from the Driver Information on the
Driver tab of the Properties dialog box of the specific hardware
in Device Manager.
Some hardware manufacturers want you to install driver
files and some software for the device before the operating
system can detect this device. This is due to the fact that the
program that manages some of the hardware functionality must
be installed first so that its configuration file can accurately
refer to the installed drivers. Also, this program should be
able to add driver files to the operating system drivers location
directories before the operating system detects the device.
The process of adding drivers is usually performed by
running the installation program from the provided CD-ROM
or from the installation packages pre-downloaded from the
manufacturer's website.
When a device is added to the system, it is detected. The
Plug and Play service identifies the device and looks for the
correct driver in the storage. If it is found, the device is considered
authorized, and the driver files are used by the Plug
and Play service to copy them from driver stores to the system
location, usually to the C:\Windows\System32\Drivers folder.
Next, using the Plug and Play service, the registry is configured
and the installed driver is run.
There are also situations in which we are faced with the
need for manual installation of equipment. There may be
several reasons for this, including the installation of obsolete
equipment, as well as situations where drivers are not supplied
in the operating system distributions or the drivers themselves
require manual installation (see Figure 6).
