Methods and functions provided by virtualization may
be quite helpful in the following cases:
¦ Start user applications created for other operating systems
without rebooting the computer.
¦ Start networking services created for other operating
systems without rebooting the computer.
¦ Test software created by a programmer for other operating
systems.
¦ Study networking using a single computer.
¦ Study various operating systems. Advantages of using
virtual machines when studying operating systems.
¦ Possibility to install operating system without changing the
structure of physical hard drive partitions – on a virtual
drive being a regular file in the computer file system.
¦ Possibility to safely manipulate partitions of virtual drive,
possibility to connect multiple virtual hard drives to a
virtual machine and safely study management of drive
resources.
¦ Possibility to experiment with an operating system installed
virtually without being afraid to damage the real operating
system and data.
¦ Possibility to back up the file of the virtual hard drive
and to quickly restore the damaged virtual system using
this backup.
¦ Possibility to study networking on a single computer.
General ideas about hardware part of a virtual computer,
support of one type of equipment of each type (video
card, chipset, etc.) regardless of the equipment installed
on the real computer. Wide possibilities on the usage of
virtual storages (floppy disks, CD/DVD ROM) on the
virtual computer.
Today, there are more than a dozen of various systems to
solve virtualization problems, beginning with the simplest
and ending with the most complicated one: from Virtual PC
to Microsoft Hyper-V, from VM Player to VMWare ESXi
Server, and so on.
As a rule, simple solutions are highly limited in functionality, and serious products are hard to configure and expensive.
In our case, it is desirable to have simple to study and free
software in order to get acquainted with virtualization. The
most suitable solution is VirtualBox.
VirtualBox was created by the Innotek company in 2007.
Sun Microsystems bought it in 2008, but it was then taken
over by Oracle in 2010, and the latter holds its position up to
the present time.
VirtualBox is a cross-platform virtualization solution.
What does it mean?
First, it is installed on your existing Intel- or AMD-based
computers, regardless of the operating system they are working
under: Windows, Mac, Linux, etc. 
Second, it widens the possibilities of your computer in
such a way that it can simultaneously run multiple operating
systems (inside of multiple virtual machines). For example,
you can run Windows and Linux on your Mac, run Windows
Server 2008 on your Linux server, run Linux on your PC
under Windows, etc.
On top of the existing applications, you can install and
run as many virtual machines as RAM and disk space allow.
VirtualBox is deceptively simple, but powerful too. It can
work everywhere, beginning with small embedded systems
or personal computers and ending with data centers and even
cloud environments.
In order to better understand virtualization and its operation principles, let’s talk about main terms used in this
technology.
¦ Host OS is an operating system of a physical computer,
where VirtualBox is installed. There are VirtualBox versions
for Windows, Mac OS X, Linux, and Solaris. There may
be platform specific differences for various host OSs.
¦ Guest OS is an operating system that works inside a virtual
machine. In theory, VirtualBox can run any x86 operating
system (DOS, Windows, OS / 2, FreeBSD, OpenBSD), but
in order to reach almost own performance of the guest
code, lots of optimizations had to be undertaken, which
are specific for certain operating systems.
¦ Virtual machine is a special environment, which is created
by VirtualBox for your guest OS during its operation.
In other words, you run the guest OS inside a virtual
machine. Usually, VM is displayed as a window on the
desktop of your computer, but depending on the Virtual
Box interface used by you, it can be displayed in the
full-screen mode or remotely on another computer. In
a more abstract form, VirtualBox views VM as a set of
parameters that define its behavior. They must include:
what VirtualBox virtual disks must be virtualized, through
what container files, what CDs are in the set. Besides,
they must contain information (regardless of whether
they are run simultaneously, save, save snapshots, etc.).
These settings are displayed in the VirtualBox Manager.
Put it differently, virtual machine is also something you
can see in a dialog box of settings.
¦ Guest Additions are special software packages supplied
with VirtualBox, but they are intended for installation
inside a virtual machine in order to increase performance
of the guest OS and add further functions.
In order to install VirtualBox, first download installation
packages from the official website at: http://www.virtualbox.org.
Base package consists of all open-source components and
is licensed in accordance with GNU General Public License
V2.2. You can load additional extension packages that extend
functionality of the base VirtualBox package. To date Oracle
provides one extension package, which includes some additional functions.
After the VirtualBox installation, which is performed in
the usual way, you can start to create your virtual machine.
After the program is launched
On the one hand, this value must be not less than the
one specified in the hardware requirements to the operating
system under installation. On the other hand, it’s meaningless
to allocate too much memory.
Green scale shows how much memory you can allocate.
Red scale warns that you encroach on the zone allocated to
the main OS. The program will prompt you the recommended
memory size and you should leave it like this unless you have
some serious reasons to change it.
The third window of the Wizard lets you begin the process
of creating virtual hard disk. By default it proposes you to
create a new virtual hard disk. We will agree on this since
creation of a diskless workstation is beyond our current scope,
and given that this is our first time working with VirtualBox,
we don’t have an existing virtual hard disk either.
Here, it is very important to specify where exactly the main
machine will create the disk image file. This is a user profile
under which VirtualBox is run. But taking into account the
future size (or the current one in case of fixed type), it is highly
not recommended to store it on the system disk.
And if multiple virtual machines must be created, C: drive
will run out of space very quickly. That’s why it is recommended
to create a separate directory on some of the drives other than
the system one that has the required free space.
You can specify new drive by clicking the folder icon to
the right hand of the window next to the file name, which will
be assigned to the image file of the virtual disk.
This is where the Wizard’s work is done. Just a few finishing
touches, and the virtual machine is ready for use. The buttons
Settings and Start in the main menu are active now.
Let’s perform additional settings.
General
The first tab is Basic. It allows us to change parameters selected in the very beginning of the creation of virtual machine. 