Starting PC and Booting OS
For almost all modern computers, the boot process is mostly
automated, but this does not mean that it does not deserve
to be introduced.
Let’s consider the basic stages of operating system loading:
Turning on the computer, POST, BootMonitor
The initial stage of loading the operating system after turning
on the computer starts in the BIOS (Basic Input/Output
System). In the BIOS settings, we specify the sequence of
browsing the possible boot devices in the order of their priority.
There are various options for downloading and their
combinations: from hard disk, CD/DVD-ROM, USB-flash,
over the network, etc.
Immediately after passing the POST (Power-On Self-Test),
the computer’s BIOS will start to cycle through the specified
boot devices until one of them finds a suitable special record
that contains information about further actions.
Loader of the 1st Level. Master Boot Record
Master Boot Record is the record located in the first physical
sectors of bootable storage devices. It contains a Partition
Table and executable code.
The main task of the program written in the MBR is to
search for the active system partition of the disk and transfer
control to its boot sector. Thus, this stage can be called a preparatory
stage, because the OS itself does not directly load itself.
A system partition is referred to as a disk partition (storage
device) on which operating system files are located, which are
responsible for the OS boot process (the operating system itself
can be located in another section). In principle, there can be
several system partitions, so one of them is marked as active.
It is it that is looked for by the program loaded with the MBR.
Loader of the 2nd Level. Partition Boot Sector
The next step in the computer boot is to transfer control
to the executable code written in the PBS (Partition Boot
Sector). PBS is located in the first sector (sectors) of the corresponding
disk partition. In the PBS code, the file name of
the operating system loader is registered, and the control is
transferred to this stage.
The initial stage of loading the operating system.
OS boot manager
If we are talking about older versions of Windows up to
Vista, for example, Windows XP, then Ntldr will be loaded. It,
in turn, reads information from the text file Boot.ini, which
contains information about the installed operating systems.
Starting with Windows Vista and up to Windows 10, the boot
manager is called Bootmgr. It reads the list of installed operating
systems not from the boot.ini file, but from the system
BCD (Boot Configuration Data) storage.
This dispatcher is on the hidden System section, which
we mentioned earlier.
Booting the operating system kernel
The final stage of loading the operating system is to load
the OS kernel and transfer control to it.
Multiboot Support
You might want to install Windows 10, but leave the other
previously installed operating systems. Double loading or
multi-boot allows the computer to boot multiple operating
systems. Your computer will be automatically configured for
multicasting if:
■■ on your computer, there was installed operating system
with dual boot before installing Windows 10,
■■ you are not updated from this operating system,
■■ You installed Windows 10 in a different partition.
One of the reasons for using multiboot is testing various
systems. For example, you can configure one computer to
multiboot with Windows 7, Windows 8.1, and Windows 10.
■■ Here are some recommendations for configuring multiboot:
■■ Make sure that you have enough free disk space.
■■ Windows 10 should be installed on a separate partition
for multi-boot with other operating systems.
■■ It is recommended to install older operating systems before
installing newer operating systems. If you want to provide
multi-boot with Windows 7 and Windows 10, you first
need to install Windows 7. If you first install Windows 10,
you cannot install Windows 7 without having damaged
the configuration of Windows 10.
■■ Do not install Windows 10 on a compressed volume.
■■ After you have installed several operating systems, select
the system that will be loaded by default.
■ The bcdedit console utility
The bcdedit utility provides much more options for editing
multiboot parameters. You can work with this utility only
if you run the command prompt as administrator. To open
a command prompt, you can do one of the following:
■■ Go to the \Windows\system32 directory, find cmd.exe in
it, open the context menu and select the Run as administrator
item.
■■ Type cmd.exe in the Search for programs and files box,
open the shortcut menu and select the Run as administrator
item
When the command prompt opens, type bcdedit to start
the bcdedit utility. You can also enter bcdedit /? to view all
the bcdedit commands 
system without activation. At the end of the grace period,
you cannot create new files or save changes to existing files
until Windows 10 is activated. When the grace period ends,
the Windows Activation Wizard automatically starts. It will
prompt you to go through the activation process. You may
need to click the Change product key button and enter the license
number that comes with a copy of Windows 10 (fig. 47).
Windows Update
Windows Update is a utility that connects to the Microsoft
Web site or to a local update server called the Windows Server
Update Services (WSUS) server to ensure that the Windows 10
operating system (along with other Microsoft products) has
the most current versions of the files or Microsoft operating
system software.
Below are some common update categories related to
Windows Update.
■■ Security updates
■■ Critical updates
■■ Service packages
■■ Drivers
■■ Product/software updates
■■ Windows Store.
Upgrade Process
Microsoft usually releases updates to its products on
Tuesdays :). But before this update is available to end users,
it will be tested in Microsoft.
The Windows development team adds new features and
capabilities to Windows using production cycles. The cycle
consists of three stages: development, testing, and release.
After the new features for Windows 10 are developed,
Microsoft employees test these updates on their own computers.
This is called «self-testing».
After the updates are tested in Microsoft, they will then
be published for download by end users